---
date: 2022-11-26
---

# Announcing Getty 0.2.0

<!-- more -->

I am happy to announce a new version of Getty, 0.2.0. :tada:

Getty is a framework for building __robust__, __optimal__, and __reusable__
serializers/deserializers in Zig. To install Getty, follow the instructions
listed on the [Installation](https://getty.so/user-guide/installation/) page.

## What's in 0.2.0

### Revamped Interfaces

Thanks to stage2, there were lots of improvements made to the interfaces in Getty. Most notably:

- Required method parameters are now optional struct fields, making implementing interfaces much simpler.
- Most associated types have been made optional, so no more `getty.TODO`.
- Empty error sets are now allowed.
- No more relying on `undefined` errors to indicate that a unimplemented method was called. Getty can now have `@compileError`s in its interfaces to let you know about that.

```zig title="Zig code"
const Serializer = struct {
    pub usingnamespace Serializer(
        @This(),
        void,
        error{},
        null,
        null,
        null,
        null,
        null,
        .{ .serializeBool = serializeBool },
    );
};
```

### Simpler Customization

On the customization side of things, two main features have been added.

First, you can now write **type-defined blocks/tuples (TBT)**, which are
(de)serialization blocks/tuples defined within a `struct` or `union` type.
Getty will automatically process TBTs, meaning that you don't have to pass them
in explicitly.

Second, preliminary support for **attributes** have landed. Attributes allow
you to easily configure the (de)serialization process for a type without having
to manually write everything out. This release introduced support only for the
`skip`, `rename`, and `ignore_unknown_fields` attributes.

```zig title="Zig code"
const std = @import("std");
const json = @import("json");

const allocator = std.heap.page_allocator;

const Point = struct {
    x: i32,
    y: i32,

    pub const @"getty.sbt" = struct {
        pub fn is(comptime T: type) bool {
            return T == Point;
        }

        pub const attributes = .{
            .x = .{ .rename = "X" },
            .y = .{ .skip = true },
        };
    };
};

pub fn main() anyerror!void {
    _ = try json.toSlice(allocator, Point{ .x = 1, .y = 2 }); // {"X":1}
}
```

### Union Serialization

Before, unions were serialized as their payload value. However, this made
things inconsistent as there was no good way to go back during deserialization
with that approach.

To fix this, unions are now serialized using the externally tagged format by default.

```zig title="Zig code"
const std = @import("std");
const getty = @import("getty");
const json = @import("json");

const allocator = std.heap.page_allocator;

pub fn main() !void {
    const U = union(enum) { foo: i32 };

    var slice = try json.toSlice(allocator, U{ .foo = 123 });
    defer allocator.free(slice);

    std.debug.print("{s}\n", .{slice}); // {"foo":123}
}
```

### Ignoring Deserialized Data

A new method has been added to the
[`getty.Deserializer`](https://docs.getty.so/#A;std:Deserializer) interface:
`deserializeIgnored`. This method is intended to be used whenever the input
data of a deserializer should be ignored. For example, when the `skip`
attribute is set for a `struct`, `deserializeIgnored` can be called in order to
ignore a key and/or value in the deserializer's input data.

### Support

Some new types are now supported by Getty!

???+ success "Serialization"

    - [`std.BoundedArray`](https://ziglang.org/documentation/master/std/#A;std:BoundedArray)

???+ success "Deserialization"

    - Union (tagged)
    - Union (untagged)
    - Sentinel-terminated slice

## Other Changes

There are other changes in the Getty 0.2.0 release. You can see the full changelog [here](https://github.com/getty-zig/getty/compare/0.1.0...0.2.0).
